hello I'm aai masiri welcome to the
program we start in the Middle East the
aid organization World Central Kitchen
that's based in the US says it's
immediately suspending its operations in
Gaza after an air strike killed seven of
its workers the organization says those
killed are from Australia Poland the
United Kingdom a dual citizen of the US
and Canada as well as a Palestinian in a
statement it said the Convoy was hit as
it was leaving the de B Warehouse after
unloading Aid and that it had
coordinated movements with the IDF it
said quote this is not only an attack
against wck this is an attack on
humanitarian organizations showing up in
the most dire of situations where food
is being used as a weapon of War this is
unforgivable of course Israel denies
that it is using food as a weapon of War
now earlier Australian prime minister
Anthony albanesi has confirmed one
Australian woman zi francom was among
those killed Graeme Satchel has this
report the bodies of Aid workers being
taken to a hospital in central Gaza they
worked for the charity World Central
Kitchen they were traveling in Armored
Cars branded with their charity logo
when they were hit by an Israeli air
strike the charity says seven were
killed from all corners of the world
Britain Poland Australia America Canada
and
Palestine hey this is and we're at the
the smiling face of Australian zie
Franken one of those who lost their
lives she'd been working in Gaza helping
to organize the supply and preparation
of food the Australian government is
demanding answers the truth is that that
this is beyond uh Beyond any reasonable
circumstances someone going about
providing Aid and humanitarian
assistance uh should lose their life
this is a video produced by the charity
it is one of the biggest providers of
food Aid in Gaza and has delivered more
than 42 million meals since last
October in a statement the Israeli
military said it was conducting a review
at the highest level to understand the
circumstances of what it called a tragic
incident but the deaths have been
condemned by the founder of the charity
Jose Andres he said the Israeli
government needs to stop this
indiscriminate killing it needs to stop
restricting humanitarian Aid stop
killing civilians and Aid workers and
stop using food as a
weapon in the Syrian Capital Damascus
the clearup has started after an Israeli
air strike on Iran's consulate two
senior commanders of the Iranian
revolutionary guard were killed in the
attack it is the clearest sign yet that
this conflict is escalating the Iranian
Ambassador in Damascus hinted at
retaliation definitely the Zionist
regime knows better than anyone that
such crimes and violating international
law will have its response in an
appropriate
time the deaths of foreign aid workers
in Gaza will put international pressure
on Israel governments around the world
will want assurances that Charities and
their staff can operate safely Graham
Satchel BBC
News well let's look closer at that
attack in Damascus that strike in
Damascus and speak to Dr Alam senior
lecturer in politics and international
relations on Iran and the Middle East at
the Australian National University uh
thank you for your time now Muhammad
zahi was uh the senior Commander the
main senior Commander there that was uh
that was apparently killed in that
attack could you put that into context
for us how high profile a figure he is
in
Iran well
General zah was involved in in Iran's
activities in in the region since
1980s he's the the top uh revolutionary
guard Commander uh uh responsible for
coordination between Iranian backed
groups militias in Syria and Lebanon um
and of course his Deputy also uh was
killed uh amongst five other
revolutionary guard members uh this is
perhaps the the the the the top
assassination since uh assassination of
General kasm suan in Baghdad in 20 early
2020 uh what what makes this uh incident
even more important is that has happened
in Iranian consulate which is considered
as Iran soil in Damascus uh therefore is
a violation of international law however
it seems also that t Aviv is well
determined to drag Iran into a war and
in doing so they um they they they hope
to achieve the following uh objectives
one is to involve uh United States in
the region uh and to confront Iran
perhaps directly and also to unite the
fragmented political and societal um um
uh Spectrum inside the country the the
division between prime minister
Netanyahu and uh and the and people we
we know that the demonstrations have
been uh ongoing uh and also to to divert
the attention from what's going on in
Gaza well Dr Sal to that point uh and
given the fact that there are all these
fears of an escalation of this war what
options do you think Iran would
consider uh I would say uh Iran knows
very well that Tel Aviv wants to dve
Iran into war uh and they benefit from
this uh act if happens uh therefore for
they won't directly retaliate uh uh and
they if they will do it through their
proxies in in Iraq in in Lebanon or in
Yemen uh the the
direct kind of conflict between Iran and
Israel is it would be catastrophic uh
and therefore Iran knows very well that
U um that this should not happen and and
we know that there are channels that Dr
s apologies uh do you mean then when you
talk about its proxies and also you
mentioned Lebanon there that Hezbollah
could be a vehicle in some way for a
response yes of course Hezbollah is
extension of Iran's security Doctrine in
the region and it's it's actually
designated to to to to defend Iran and
uh rather than any other places
therefore um uh it depends I mean the
National Security Council in Iran uh
last night have made the decision we
don't know what the decision might be
but uh we may know that uh uh that
hisbah would be involved in in such
retaliation uh in one way or another
soon uh the the the question is that
there are channels that that tan and
Washington are are are in touch uh it
seems that United States has been blamed
by tan U and United States also uh have
uh declared that they have not been uh
uh in involved in such attack and and
there there are hopes that United States
and Iran may solve this problem somehow
uh Bey the curtains all right thank you
so much Dr Alam s for that
perspective now you you'll remember the
beginning of this program we started
with the news that the world Central
Kitchen and Aid organization has said
that it's suspending all its operations
immediately in Gaza and that's after
they said an air strike has killed seven
of their aid workers now let's go live
to Jerusalem and our Middle East
correspondent yolan Nell for more uh
yoland what's the latest on
that quite a lot of detail given in the
statement from World Central Kitchen
saying that it's seven Aid workers uh
that have been killed they British
Australian polish us and Canadian
national dual national uh and
Palestinians as well uh killed in an
apparent Israeli air strike in Dar balah
which is in the center of the Gaza Strip
and uh the US charity uh saying that um
these workers and its team were in a
convoy of three cars uh two of them
armored and they had been coordinating
their movements with the Israeli
military they were leaving a warehouse
in that City having just unloaded
something like 100 tons of food a that
had just been brought in by sea of
course this is a charity that's been
very much involved um in opening up the
new Maritime route between Cyprus and
and Gaza and bringing food in that way
um now the CEO of the organization eron
Gore said this is an attack on
humanitarian organizations showing up in
the most dire of situations where food
is being used as a weapon of War this is
unforgivable the Israeli military has
not confirmed this strike it said it's
carrying out an indepth examination of
the highest levels to understand the
circumstances of what it calls a tragic
incident and your land what position
does this put Israel's allies in allies
like the United States the United
Kingdom uh allies who potentially have
Nationals who've been killed in this
strike we've already had the Australian
prime minister coming out um and
demanding that those responsible for
this be held accountable and saying that
um Australia has spoken to the Israeli
government as a result of one of its
citizens um being killed uh this is
really something that will have further
repercussions for other Aid work um
happening in Gaza and it involves so
many countries because of the different
nationalities of the aid workers
involved the it's a US charity we've
also had the National Security Council
um in the US coming out and talking
about this as being a tragic incident
and saying that it too is looking for
answers